# SVD-project
The goal of this project is to reconstruct a grayscale image using singular value decomposition. I will elaborate on the math first, and then analyze the results. 
Let A be a matrix in R^(m x n) representing our test image. Each entry represents the color grade of a pixel in the image. 255 corresponds to white, and 0 corresponds to black. Values in between are different shades of gray. Our goal is to reconstruct our test image as closely as possible using a low rank approximation of A. 
First let us derive the SVD formula, which is $A= (U)(\Sigma)(V^T)$, where $V$ is R^(n x n), $\Sigma$ is R^(m x n), and $U$ is R^(m x m). Consider $(A^T)(A)$, which is n x n. The image shows that (A^T)(A) is symmetric and postive semidefinite. Using the spectral theorem, we can conclude that (A^T)(A) has real eigenvalues and there exists a basis of R^n consisting of eigenvectors of (A^T)(A). This means that there exists $V= (v_1, v_2,...,v_n)$ such that $v_i$ are eigenvectors of (A^T)(A) and comprise of a basis of R^n, meaning that they are orthonormal. What we want to do is to find unit vectors, $u_i$, in R^m, and singular values ($\sigma) such that $A(v_i)= (\sigma_i)(u_i)$. Let $lambda_i$ be the eigenvalues of A, meaning that $A(v_i)= (\lambda_i)(v_i)$. Let $\sigma_i= \sqrt{\lambda_i}$, and $u_i= \frac{A*v_i}{\sigma_i}$. It is easy to show that $u_i$ are orthogonal. Note that it is possible for some of the eigenvalues to be zero, which would mean there is no corresponding $u_i$ for these eigenvalues. For now, let us assume that all the n eigenvalues are nonzero. Then we can write the equality $(A)(V)= (U)(\Sigma)$, where $U$ is m x n, and $\Sigma$ is an n x n diagonal matrix with singular values on the diagonal. Note that if m is greater than n, the column space of $U$ is a subspace of R^m. We can constuct another (m-n) orthogonal vectors, but then $\Sigma$ changes shape, becoming m x n, with still n singular values on the diagonal and zeros underneath. This effectively cancels the (m-n) orthogonal vectors we computed, making it slightly inefficient. This is called the full SVD, which we use in the code. Finally, we can right-mutliply by $V^ (-1)$, which is the same as $V^T$ for orthogonal matrices, to get $A= (U)(\Sigma)(V^T)$. 
